We extend a warm welcome to all.
Today's session will begin with a music video presentation
that will remind us of the many blessings in store for Jehovah's servants
and motivate us to share these precious truths with others.
Please enjoy.
The ancient songs of Jesus
and all the perfect ones will be.
We will always have love
and that is life.
I feel more pain,
I feel more pain in my heart
I will not remember.
It's over.
The scripture theme for these two sessions is taken from 2 Peter 314,
where we are admonished to be found spotless
and unblemished and in peace.
These sessions will highlight what we can individually do to pursue peace with others.
To begin, please join in seeing song number 58,
searching for friends of peace.
That song number 58.
As Jehovah's people,
we are proud to witness about the God of peace
and to proclaim his kingdom.
How can we give an effective witness
and help interested ones to progress?
Our first symposium for this session will address these questions.
For the Catholic Dean,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will deliver the first talk of the symposium.
Be ready to share the good news of peace,
maintain your zeal.
This symposium is about sharing the good news of peace.
What a privilege it is to help humble people find peace with Jehovah.
At Ephesians 6.15,
and describing our Christians' complete suit of armor,
it mentions our feet.
Now, back at that time,
thank you Roman soldiers,
Paul knew that often they marched for hundreds of miles
on Roman highways,
crisscrossing the empire.
So at Ephesians 6.15,
he said this,
having your feet shed in readiness,
in readiness to declare the good news of peace.
Yes, ready to share the good news of peace
on every suitable occasion.
In this symposium,
we'll discuss five ways to remain ready to preach and teach.
We'd first like to discuss why it's important
to maintain your zeal.
Now, as an analogy,
zeal has often been linked to fire.
We even use expression, don't we?
He has a fiery zeal for his beliefs.
Well, what does a fiery zeal indicate?
Please find Romans 114 and 15,
and here it does not actually use the word zeal,
but the sense of the word is evident.
You see, we're on fire.
We're stoked up.
We are ready.
Did you find it?
Romans 114 and 15.
Both to Greeks and to foreigners,
both to wise and to senseless ones,
I am a debtor.
So I am eager.
You see, ready with fiery zeal,
eager to declare the good news.
Celicy evangelizers are eager to declare the good news.
They're on fire.
They want others to find peace with Jehovah.
But is there something that can dampen that flame?
Something that could even extinguish the eager desire,
the readiness to find those
who even unknowingly yearn for peace?
Yes.
It can be difficult to remain eager with fiery zeal
when we face such problems as
an unresponsive territory,
criticism, or outright opposition to the work,
and then there are the pressures of daily life.
Those issues can also be likened to a fire,
to destructive fires,
like the wildfires that have plagued
the western part of the United States year after year.
Those problems can threaten our zeal and enthusiasm.
So what can we do?
Well, there's an English expression
that originates with firefighters.
The expression is to fight fire with fire.
In the path of a raging wildfire,
one technique is to ignite a controlled fire.
That controlled fire consumes combustible materials.
So when the wildfire advances to that point,
there's no fuel left,
and the wildfire goes out.
Fight fire with fire.
Keep your zeal for the ministry burning brightly.
And now please find 1st November the 416.
If our zeal fades,
the flame smolders,
we might miss out on opportunities
to help others to gain life,
a life of peace with God.
Look at 1st November the 416 with me.
It says, pay constant attention to yourself
and to your teaching.
To the flame, the temperature,
pay attention to your zeal in teaching.
It says, persevere in these things.
For by doing this, you'll say both yourself
and those who listen to you.
Yes, share the good news of peace with zeal.
Now in the following video,
note how a couple realized
that the flame had gone out.
They still had some glowing embers left,
they now find a way to fan the coals
and regain their fire zeal.
I don't remember when our routine service day became so...
well, routine.
Our zeal wasn't what it used to be.
We're finally starting to notice.
Not everyone wants to listen.
We just didn't want to be the reason.
We didn't take much research to find great ideas
and set a few simple goals
like working with those who encourage us.
With Dyota and Ami,
we're always talking about
how we can reach the heart.
We got back to basics.
Be friendly.
Listen.
Let the conversation progress naturally.
Try to share an appealing scriptural thought
and keep trying.
Our zeal can attract an honest person to the truth.
In the video,
what wildfires or problems
did the couple face that sucked the oxygen out of their ministry?
Well, the four we mentioned earlier,
it seems the couple's zeal was waning
because of seemingly unresponsive territory.
And as tired as the husband looked in that first scene,
the pressures of daily life
might have been having a toll on him.
So how did they come to realize
they needed to fight fire with fire?
Do you remember their kitchen table talk?
The husband mused that not everyone wants to listen.
But then he added,
we just didn't want to be the reason.
You see, the reason for them not listening.
They decided to fight fire with fire.
They re-ignited their own controlled fire of zeal
to counteract the problems they were succumbing to.
Well, what were some of the techniques they used?
The first was to pray to Jehovah.
Could it be the husband borrowed the words of Romans 12-11 in this prayer?
Yes.
He may well have asked Jehovah to help him as a couple
to be a glow with the Spirit.
Remember he said earlier,
I don't remember when our routine service day became so,
well, routine.
Fight the wildfire by again becoming a glow with the Spirit.
Ensure that any lack of response
is not due to our lackluster.
Well, what else did you notice they did to rekindle their zeal?
They did some research,
looking for suggestions to invigorate their ministry.
Yes, and regular Bible study helps us to remember
why we endure and the disciples making work.
For example, review Jesus' attitude toward the ministry.
The apostles bold witnessing despite fiery opposition.
The disposition of Paul,
Aquila and Priscilla, Stephen, and other Bible characters.
These can infuse us with similar zeal.
Next, keep your ministry fresh.
Well, what does that mean?
Instead of having a number of phone calls that go unanswered,
which is similar to having no one at home when in the door-to-door work,
change the time of day for witnessing when more people are home.
Participate in various forms with ministry.
You know, ironically,
the pandemic, more or less for some of us
who were staunch, door-to-door witnesses,
could branch out.
We tried phone witnessing, letter writing,
and now we have a variety of preaching activities,
and this can keep us more fully engaged and enthused.
And did you notice what the couple in the video said as a goal?
Periodically, they decided in advance
to share in the ministry with someone specific.
And then they determined to talk about encouraging subjects
when in-between calls,
whether in phone witnessing or in the public ministry.
Jehovah values our work in the ministry,
regardless of the response we receive.
Hey, Route 610.
Are you familiar with that? Of course you are.
But it does not say,
Jehovah does not forget the number of return visits you make.
It does not say,
he does not forget how many Bible studies you conduct.
No, it says he does not forget your work,
your effort,
and the love you showed for his name.
Our Zeal for the ministry demonstrates that
we have a deep love for Jehovah and Jesus.
If like the couple in the video,
you detect that your routine of service
is becoming well, very routine,
then fight fire with fire.
Maintain that fire as Zeal.
Be ready to share the good news of peace.
Brother Robert Soranco,
a helper of the writing committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
Be ready to share the good news of peace.
Prepare well.
What would you think and how would you feel if I showed up
to give this talk but had done nothing to prepare what to say to you?
I had not bothered to study the outline I was given,
could not remember the theme,
had no idea what the main points are,
and would have to guess at what scriptures to use to support them.
And then as I spoke, I would ramble in coherently
and make a very bad impression.
I know how I would feel,
I would be a nervous wreck,
and you would wonder why I did not think enough of you
to put all the time and effort that was necessary
into preparing the talk so that you could get the most benefit from it.
Can you see where I'm going with this?
Could the same things be said if you engaged in the ministry
without first preparing what to say?
You did not review the sample conversations that had been provided,
could not think of how to start a conversation
and did not know what scripture to share.
How nervous would you be?
And what would the householder think of you?
It would likely be a very short, uncomfortable conversation
and the other person may not care to have you call again.
We should take some time to prepare well before we preach.
Why?
Because we have the best message ever,
the good news of peace to share with people,
and we should do our best so that they will want to listen to what we have to say.
Jesus helped his disciples to prepare for the ministry.
Luke chapter 10 reports that before sending out 70 disciples to preach,
he shared with them a pleasant way to greet each householder,
told them what to talk about, the kingdom of God,
and he told them how to respond to the varied reactions
they would get in their territory.
As a result, because the disciples were fully prepared for the ministry,
they enjoyed some thrilling experiences.
When we are prepared, we are more poised, enthusiastic,
and can truly enjoy the ministry.
As you watch the following video, notice the good results of preparing well.
We'd made some good changes,
but we weren't done.
I asked Yudi what she planned to talk about.
That started the usual scramble,
and we got it, the sample conversation.
That'll do, but for that to work, I had to remember the scripture.
We were both a little forgetful that morning.
Yeah, we needed to prepare better.
We've been relying on our experience and not enough on Jehovah.
So, first, we prepared our hearts.
Then, we prepared our minds and found new ways to use our preaching tools.
Even a little preparation for initial calls.
And our return visits went a long way.
The husband said, yeah, we needed to prepare better.
Have you ever thought that about your ministry?
Like the couple in the video, we can first prepare our heart and our mind,
and then see how best to use our preaching tools.
Our goal should be the same as that of the Apostle Paul.
At 1 Corinthians 9, verse 23,
he wrote that he wanted to do all things for the sake of the good news
and spread with others.
So, let's think about some specific things we can do to prepare well,
beginning with what we can say on the initial call,
whether that is done in person or over the telephone.
Each issue of the Christian life and ministry meeting workbook
provides us with sample conversations.
They give us some helpful ideas.
Of course, you may modify the samples or use something entirely different.
Perhaps a subject from a previous month or a different scripture
would have wider appeal in your territory.
Your opening words may be the most important part of the presentation,
so think it through.
If the introduction does not arouse interest,
the other person may terminate the conversation before we can give a witness.
We will be more effective if we carefully prepare
the first sentence or two that we will say after giving a customary greeting.
We might say,
many people are concerned about
or
I would like to get your opinion on
or say something else.
Then pick a topic that is of local interest
and ask a wellward viewpoint question that will draw the person
into the conversation.
Now, what about preparing for return visits?
That actually begins on the initial call
by leaving a question for the person to think about until you call again.
That is how the sample initial calls and return visits are set up
in the median workbook.
By leaving a thought-provoking question at the end of every visit,
we can keep the chain of conversations going as long as possible.
We can illustrate it this way.
Imagine a freight train with an engine at the front,
a caboose of the rear,
and many cars in between.
What keeps all those cars moving together down the train track?
There is a device called a coupler at the back of each train car
that latches onto the coupler at the front of the car behind it.
By being coupled or linked together,
the cars all run as a unit along the track.
So, the question that we leave with a householder
at the end of one visit is what we can latch onto
at the beginning of our next visit
so that we can keep the train of thought going
from one conversation to the next.
For example, on the initial call you could ask,
why is there so much suffering in the world?
After discussing that, raise the question,
how does God feel about our suffering?
But don't answer the question until your next visit.
After answering that question on the first return visit,
leave the person with this question,
what will God do to end our suffering,
to be discussed on your next visit?
It is also important to have an objective in mind
to return visit.
Before making the call, think about what you want to accomplish on that call.
If you raised a question,
the last time your objective will surely include answering that question
from the Bible.
Of course, the ultimate objective is to try to start a Bible study
in the enjoy life forever brochure.
Now, what about preparing for the Bible studies that we conduct?
Even if we know the material very well,
we should prepare for each study session with our student in mind.
That means thinking about and anticipating the views and needs of that individual.
What points might he struggle to understand or accept?
It also means getting familiar with the lesson to be covered
in our interactive Bible course.
Read the lesson carefully.
Look up the read scriptures to see how they apply.
Watch the videos that will be shown during the lesson
and review the items in the explore section
so that you will know which of those will be especially helpful to your student.
Then, you will be well prepared to conduct the study.
Since it is God who makes the seed of truth grow in a person's heart,
we should ask for Jehovah's blessing on our preparation for the study
so that we can best help the student spiritually.
And we will be more effective in our ministry if we stay up to date
with the latest material and features found on JW.org and in JW Library.
So learn how to navigate the website and the app.
Two very helpful features on the website are Bible questions answered
under the Bible Teachings tab.
And frequently ask questions under the about us tab.
They can also be found on the app under article series.
The Apostle Paul described himself at 1 Corinthians 310 as a skilled master builder.
That is because he was engaging in a spiritual construction work
to build Christian disciples.
And we are doing the same sort of work when we engage in the ministry.
But to build effectively, we must learn to use our tools well.
We especially need to develop skill in using our principal tool, God's Word,
as well as learn how to make effective use of the publications
in our teaching toolbox.
A builder who prepares before starting to work avoids mistakes and frustration.
Remember what the brother said at the end of the video?
Even a little preparation goes a long way.
And that is what will help you to do your best in the ministry.
Just as Paul recommended at 2 Timothy 2 verse 15.
Please follow along in your Bible, if you will.
It's 2 Timothy 2 verse 15.
Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God,
a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the Word of the truth,
a right.
Then you will experience great joy in the spiritual building work that is taking place now
because you will be ready and well prepared to share the good news of peace.
Brother Anthony Morris, a member of the governing body,
will now present the next talk of the symposium.
Be ready to share the good news of peace.
Take the initiative.
For this part of the symposium, share the good news of peace.
We're going to discuss the need to take the initiative.
Now, we're going to look at why we should take the initiative,
how to take the initiative, and then concluding thought about
who's helping and directing us in our preaching work.
Now, first of all, why take the initiative?
Well, think about it.
One thing about being Jehovah's Witnesses is that we're never off duty.
We never stop being one of Jehovah's Witnesses, wherever we are, whatever we're doing.
So it isn't just that when we're out in formal preaching work with congregation group,
we are one of Jehovah's Witnesses all the time.
There's no such thing as being off duty when we're one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Now, to give you an idea of how significant this is with informal witnessing,
let me tell you a statistic, a survey was taken some years ago,
and you'll be surprised possibly.
In one group of over 200 baptized Witnesses,
now notice over 40% have been contacted by informal witnessing.
Isn't that amazing?
So the door to door is crucial, of course, during COVID that's been inhibited,
the letter writing has its place, the phone witnessing,
but the point is there's other times where we can do some witnessing informally.
Now, let's examine how to do it, and the best example of how to do informal witnessing
is, of course, Christ Jesus.
And there's an account all of us are familiar with in the Bible book of John,
so please find John chapter 4, and we're going to take a look at how Jesus took the initiative
and then imitate him to do just as he did.
Now, notice here in John chapter 4, we get the context that they've been traveling through Samaria,
and then verse 6 will read, in fact, Jacob's well was there.
Now, Jesus tired out as he was from the journey was sitting at the well.
It was about the sixth hour.
Now, that's interesting as it not, see?
Jesus was tired, perfect man, but human, and his journey tired him out,
and he's there about noon sitting at the well, and on notice what happens.
In verse 7, a woman of Samaria came to draw water.
Jesus said to her, give me a drink, real simple, give me a drink.
Well, what did we learn from this?
As you notice, Jesus was tired.
We get tired because of being imperfect.
If a perfect man gets tired out, certainly we get tired.
Sometimes you get feeling, well, maybe I could witness to this person take the initiative,
but I just don't feel like it. I'm tired.
Not with Jesus.
See, to imitate Jesus even in a case that you're tired, you're thinking of others,
and you want to take the opportunity to start a conversation.
That's the initial goal.
Now, notice something else here that we learn in the ninth verse of John chapter 4.
Samaritan woman said to him, how is it that you, despite being a Jew, ask me for a drink,
even though I am a Samaritan woman?
And then we learn more here with parentheses for Jews, have no dealings with Samaritan.
And it went both ways.
That's the way the prejudice was, no dealings, and on top of that, she's a woman.
And women were not treated very nice during that period in man's history.
So she's a Samaritan, she's a woman, and Jesus asks her for a drink.
Starts a conversation with her.
Now, these are the things we learn with this.
He didn't make any assumptions about her, and obviously knew she was a woman,
and a Samaritan, a traveling through Samaritan at that time.
And he didn't refuse to speak to her because of that.
So the lesson for us there is don't judge people by what you see,
based on their culture, color of their skin.
This world is filled with judges.
Where do you hold his witnesses?
We don't do that.
We leave the judging to Jehovah in Jesus Christ, and don't judge whether you think they'll converse with you.
That's wrong.
Jesus didn't do that, and he set that perfect example for us.
Go ahead, and then if you're a little nervous about it, then we beg Jehovah for his spirit to help us,
to give us the courage to witness about his beautiful name and purposes.
Now, he also teaches us something else, interesting here,
and this is where taking the initiative, you start a conversation, you don't rush into things.
Now, notice how you see we read verse 9, and then they had this conversation take place
through these following verses here.
They get to verse 24 where he mentions God's spirit and must worship him with spirit and truth.
And now, here's what happens, they had this fine conversation after simply asking for a drink.
Notice verse 25, the woman said to him,
I know that Messiah is coming who is called Christ.
Whenever that one comes, he will declare all things to us openly.
She spoke out of her heart.
Notice verse 26, Jesus said to her,
I am He, the one speaking to you, my, what a moment.
And she's blessed with having the Messiah Himself speak to her.
However, give it some thought.
What if Jesus, rather than say, give me a drink, start it off with,
I am the Messiah.
Give me a drink.
Don't know, because Jesus had Jehovah's spirit and heavenly wisdom,
and He entered the conversation first.
So that's what we want to keep in mind, try to do ourselves.
They have a conversation.
It might just be speaking from your heart and trying to engage the person.
For example, you could be in the doctor's office waiting room.
So you speak from your heart and you notice the person is looking at you and I said,
I look forward to the day I'll never be sick again.
Well, they could look at you and say,
this guy is crazy, or they could say, well, that would be nice.
Or what makes you believe that's going to happen for you.
Either way, you're starting taking the initiative to start a conversation
and leave the rest to Jehovah.
He's the one that gets the credit for the results.
Now, next we have a video here.
Now as you watch the following video, notice how a sister finds
an effective way to witness informally.
They seem nice.
I knew what Yudhi was thinking.
I wanted to start a conversation,
but I didn't want to bother them either.
And when an opportunity came, I just froze.
Then I was in a rush to give a witness.
It felt forced.
It helped to hear that with all been there,
our past experiences were similar.
Whenever we didn't put pressure on ourselves
and just looked for something in common to talk about,
we could usually find a moment when we could say something about the Bible.
She was curious why we were dressed up.
Turns out that she'd never talked to Jehovah's Witnesses before.
So how we appreciated how she took the initiative.
Of course, you see the contrast there that at one point she froze.
So it is stressful, no doubt about it, or only human.
But then she rushed into things, running after it with the track.
See, give us some thought, try to have the conversation,
then let the spirit move it, and that would be imitating Jesus.
Then it can move into getting into the spiritual purpose
of initiating the conversation.
So good example.
Give it a try, brothers and sisters,
and let Jehovah bless your efforts.
Now, to conclude, I think to want to share this beautiful thought
when it comes to this work we're engaging in
and sharing the good news of peace by taking the initiative,
never forget this.
And you know it, but it's a good reminder, Revelation chapter 14.
And here in the Revelation, familiar to most of you listening
in verse 6, let's read it.
And I saw another angel flying in mid-Heaven,
and he had ever lasting good news to declare to those who dwell
on the earth to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.
Now, this is profound.
Obviously, angel flying in mid-Heaven,
the footnote helps us where it's overhead,
where the birds fly.
You don't see them, and see another angel in mid-Heaven.
That's how close they are.
And this is something you want to meditate on.
Personally, when I was in the traveling work,
sometimes I'd be working with one of the brothers,
or one of the sisters, and they had opposition
and some of the territories we'd work,
and I could tell they were feeling the stress,
and I know it was the reaction of some of these householders.
So what I used to enjoy doing,
and they appreciated after they realized what I was doing.
We'd be walking along, and then I'd just stop,
and I'd look up, and I'd say,
you see them?
And they're like, who?
You're right up there above the trees,
and they'd look at me like,
our circuit overseers lost it.
But I said, see,
and we'll tell them about Revelation 146.
When we're in the preaching work,
whether it's informal,
or out there, formally door to door,
the angels are the real reapers.
At least one is nearby.
What a profound thought.
They are the real harvesters.
They are the ones directing us to the rightly disposed people.
Don't ever forget that.
When it comes to being ready to share the good news of peace,
you go ahead and take the initiative,
to start conversations.
You'll have valuable opportunities
to share the good news of peace.
Now, Brother Gary Brewer,
a helper to the service committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
Be ready to share the good news of peace.
Follow-up on interest.
To encourage us to promptly follow-up on interest
that we find in the Phil ministry,
Paul Likens our work to a plant that grows from a little seed.
Now, what vital for a planted seed to grow?
One authority says,
of all the factors that determine seed germination,
water is the first and most important.
And another reference says,
until seeds have sprouted,
keep the seed bed moist,
never allowing it to dry out.
So, what will happen to a seed that is not watered?
Nothing.
It will lay dormant.
The regular watering is vital for a seed to sprout,
to take root,
and in fact continue to grow.
Now, with these facts in mind,
Paul's words at 1 Corinthians 3 and verse 6
shows that more is required
than simply planting a seed of truth.
Let's note his words.
It's in 1 Corinthians 3 and verse 6.
It says,
I planted Apollo's watered,
but God kept making it grow.
Though all credit goes to Jehovah God
for making the spiritual seed grow,
but he allows us to have a role in the process.
Did you notice the important role Apollo's played?
He did the watering.
In a regular way,
he helped keep the spiritual soil
of the individual moist,
never allowing it to dry out.
Many people who show interest
in the Kingdom message today
are searching for their truth about God.
In order to teach them progressively,
we must return again and again.
This requires good preparation
and organization on our part.
By promptly making return visits,
we demonstrate a sincere concern for the individual,
wanting to help them grow spiritually
and develop a relationship with Jehovah.
In the following video,
notice how a sister follows up on interest shown.
Ami left a great question for her next visit.
Return visit, Mrs. Iwata.
I told her I'd visit this morning.
I just didn't schedule the time.
I could at least stop by on the way back.
Mr. again,
if I didn't try something different,
I was just going to keep missing her.
First, I wanted her to know
I hadn't forgotten her.
Dear Mrs. Iwata,
I hope you're doing well.
I promised to come by early next week.
By the way,
your flowers are so beautiful.
Then I made a plan for my service day.
Following through is just too important to leave to chance.
As you plan your share in the ministry,
follow the good example of the sister in the video
and schedule time to make regular return visits.
Doing so is just as important as other aspects of our ministry.
These regular visits with interested people
are vital links in the chain leading to a Bible study.
In our ministry,
we often compliment the householder
for the beautiful flowers or our plants in their yard,
just like the sister did in the video.
But how do they get that way?
Well, the householder probably watered them on set days
or even used an automatic sprinkler timer
to schedule regular watering cycles.
You need to have healthy and vibrant plants.
Watering cannot be left to chance.
Well, how can we apply that to our ministry?
Before leaving a person that has shown interest,
endeavor to set the proper time to water.
The water of truth will come on.
See, perhaps a wed day or hour
would you like for me to return to continue our discussion
or to answer the question.
This consideration really dignifies the person,
allowing them to share in setting the appointment.
It's important that we be willing to water
an interested person at the most convenient time for them.
Then, just like setting a timer,
put that appointment where you'll remember it.
The sister in the video put it in her electronic calendar
so she could be reminded later.
If you promise someone that you'll return
then keep your promise.
Remember Jesus' simple statement
recorded at Matthew 537,
just like your word, yes, mean, yes?
If they're truly interested,
they may go to great efforts to keep the appointment.
How disappointed they would be if we didn't show up.
Following through is just too important
to leave to chance.
Because of the busy lives that people have today,
it may be hard to find the person at home again,
even if you set an appointment.
It's a good idea to try and obtain his contact information,
maybe his phone number.
Some publishers anticipate this challenge
and simply ask,
do you text?
By simply texting,
you may be able to keep in touch
and cultivate the interest further.
If you can't get his contact information
and the person isn't home at the agreed upon time,
you might leave a brief note
just as the sister did in the video.
This will assure the householder
that you haven't forgotten them.
The disciple making work requires patience and persistence.
In this regard, note what Ecclesiastes 116 says.
Ecclesiastes 116, it says,
sow your seed in the morning
and do not let your hand rest until the evening.
For you do not know which will have success
whether this one or that one
or whether they will both do well.
When it comes to planting literal seed,
we don't know when and where it will sprout.
Many factors are beyond our control.
Something similar can be said of the disciple making work.
We need to be patient and positive
because we don't know who will respond.
Lastly and of utmost importance,
even if they return visit his brief,
share a scriptural thought.
The spiritual content of our conversation
is what makes our visit different
from many others that they may have.
Do they have neighbors, friends,
workmates or relatives that check in on them?
But for them to grow spiritually,
the water of truth from God's word must be dispensed.
To convey just a brief scriptural thought
may provide just enough to keep their spiritual soil moist.
The work involved in following up interest
is a very important assignment
that Jehovah has given to each of us.
With this in mind, let's return to Paul's illustration
and see how Jehovah views us.
It's back at 1 Corinthians chapter 3 and verse 9.
It says,
For we are God's fellow workers,
you are God's field under cultivation, God's building.
It's an honor to be one of God's fellow workers,
enabling us to show our love for Him and for our neighbors.
It brings us great joy to share the good news of peace
by following up on interest shown.
And we can be assured
those who respond favorably
will forever appreciate our diligent efforts
when they recall how we promptly followed up
when they showed interest.
Brother William Malenfont,
a helper to the teaching committee,
will now present the final talk of this symposium,
be ready to share the good news of peace,
help students grow to maturity.
Basic Bible teachings are wonderful.
Usually, it's the fundamental doctrines of the Bible,
basic teachings that draw people to the truth.
However, learning basic Bible teachings
is just the beginning of knowledge about Jehovah.
At Hebrews chapter 6 and verse 1,
the Apostle Paul exhorts all students of God's Word
to progress beyond basic teachings.
This is what is stated at Hebrews 6-1.
Therefore, now that we have moved beyond
the primary doctrine about the Christ,
let us press on to maturity.
Isn't that what we want to achieve with our Bible students?
To help them move beyond the primary doctrine
and progress to Christian maturity?
It comes about in degrees,
as students acquire an increased level of knowledge
and appreciation for the truth.
Bible students must learn to love God
and His standards
and appreciate that all of His ways and requirements
are expressions of His love for us.
When Bible students experience the good
that comes from obeying Jehovah
and following His ways,
their love for Him will deepen.
As you watch the following video,
please note how a sister helps her student
to make progress toward maturity.
Mrs. C. Water was doing great.
We were already on lesson 10.
I really hope she comes to a meeting soon.
We talked about Hebrews 10, 24 and 25
and watched the video.
Did I miss something?
I guess I did.
I was too focused on our progress with the lessons.
Instead of her progress and what she needed,
Mr. C. Water said going to meetings
would dishonor the family.
He wanted her to quit the study.
She didn't want to quit,
but whenever she tried to talk about it,
they argued.
We showed her where to look for help
and made time during our studies to talk about it more.
We all prayed for Jehovah to bless her efforts.
We did our best to share the good news of peace,
and Jehovah did the rest.
As we saw, the student took an important step
toward Christian maturity
when she began to attend meetings.
As you study with your student lesson 7 to 11
of the Enjoy Life Forever book,
please be sure to highlight Jehovah's appealing qualities
that are set forth in those lessons.
For example,
Lesson 7 of the Enjoy Life Forever book describes
Jehovah's loving ways.
We want to help our students to understand
that Jehovah really does love them as individuals
and wants them to achieve everlasting life.
The Apostle John highlights Jehovah's love
at 1 John 4.9 by pointing out
that Jehovah sent Jesus to earth
to take our place in death
and thus pay for our inherited sins
and our personal sins.
Yes, out of love,
Jehovah provided a way for us to enjoy
an approved standing with Him.
This is one of Jehovah's loving ways.
Lesson 8 shows us how to become Jehovah's friend.
This is likely something that most people
have never even thought of.
Can you imagine the privilege of becoming God's friend?
Help your students to see how their obedience
and exclusive devotion to Jehovah
pave the way to friendship with Him.
Proverbs chapter 3 verses 5 and 6
tells us specifically what Jehovah wants us to do.
Proverbs chapter 3 verses 5 and 6 says,
Trust in Jehovah with all your heart
and do not rely on your own understanding.
In all your ways, take notice of Him
and He will make your path straight.
We show our trust in Jehovah
by doing what He tells us to do
and thereby we become His friends.
Jehovah takes good care of His friends
and He is always loyal to them.
Lesson 9 highlights the power of prayer.
Teach your Bible students how to pray to Jehovah.
In addition to prayer,
regular Bible reading is also necessary
to make spiritual progress.
Psalm, the first Psalm,
verses 2 and 3,
encourages Bible reading.
Let's look it up together.
That Psalm, the first Psalm,
and we're going to read verses 2 and 3.
It's speaking about a man of God
who takes delight in God's Word.
It says,
But His delight is in the law of Jehovah,
where the law of Jehovah is found in the Bible.
And it says,
and He reads His law in an undertone,
day and night.
He will be like a tree planted by streams of water,
a tree that produces fruit in its season,
the foliage of which does not wither,
and everything He does will succeed.
Yes, everything He does as a Christian,
leading a Christian life will succeed.
Reading God's Word
and then putting it into practice
brings Jehovah's blessing.
Now, if you have a student
who feels limited in His learning ability,
perhaps due to a lack of education,
please encourage him to go to Jehovah in prayer
and persist in asking him for help to understand his Word.
James chapter 1 and verse 5 assures us
that Jehovah is ready and willing
to help those who keep on asking him for help.
Lesson 10 gives this direction.
As soon as possible,
invite Bible students to attend congregation meetings.
What your student hears and observes
at Christian meetings can touch his heart
and will help him to progress.
So when you show your student the video
what happens at a kingdom hall,
that would be a good time
to warmly invite him to attend meetings.
Also, be sure to invite a variety of publishers
to accompany you on the study.
In that way your student will get acquainted
with others in the congregation
and he will likely feel more at home
when he attends our meetings.
Lesson 11.
In this lesson,
we are encouraged to teach our students
how to do personal study
using JW.org and JW Library.
Show your student how to use these tools.
If you feel a bit unsure about teaching someone
to make use of their electronic device for research,
don't hesitate to ask for help from the congregation.
There are many who will be delighted to assist you.
The blessings that we receive
when we teach someone the truth
is described by the Apostle John,
a third John, verse 4,
where it states,
no greater joy do I have than this,
that I should hear that my children
go on walking in the truth.
Yes, John is speaking of his spiritual children.
That same joy can be ours.
What has this symposium brought to our attention?
It has helped us to see
how we can maintain our zeal for the preaching work.
It has instructed us to prepare well
to share the truth with others.
It showed us how to take the initiative
to give an informal witness,
to follow up on interest
and to help Bible students grow to maturity.
If we do the best we can in the ministry,
whether people respond or not,
we will enjoy the peace that comes from knowing
that we are pleasing Jehovah.
Hebrews 13, 15 and 16,
tells us how to bring pleasure to Jehovah God
and that's certainly something we want to do.
That's Hebrews 13, 15 and 16.
It reads,
through Him that is through Jesus,
let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise,
that is the fruit of our lips
that make public declaration to His name.
Moreover, do not forget to do good
and to share what you have with others.
For God is well pleased with such sacrifices.
Your readiness to share the good news of peace
with others is just such a sacrifice.
And you can rest assured that Jehovah is thoroughly pleased
with your loving and faithful service to Him.
Thank you, brothers, for helping us to be ready
to share the good news of peace effectively
at every opportunity.
Jehovah's organization continues to grow
and there is plenty of work to do.
Young people in particular have many opportunities
to expand their service.
How can a career in full-time service
lead to rich blessings now and in the future?
What are some common obstacles to pursuing full-time service?
How can they be overcome?
We encourage young ones to give special attention
to the next talk.
For the Mark Sanderson,
a member of the governing body will develop the theme,
young people, choose a path that leads to peace.
An 18-year-old brother was trying to decide
what he wanted to do after high school.
He was raised in the truth.
And in his heart, he wanted to be a pioneer.
But he also had a scholarship to go to university
and some other grants.
And he had been accepted to attend.
He had many questions.
How was he going to support himself
and much pressure from his teachers and counselors
to go to university?
What decision would he make?
Well, maybe many of you young ones
who are listening to this talk right now
are facing that same decision.
Or maybe you will be in a year or two.
What path will you take?
Well, now here's what we know.
Jehovah wants you to have not just a good life,
not just an average life.
He wants you to have an awesome, wonderful life,
both now during your youth,
but really for your entire life.
That's why the Bible says in Ecclesiastes,
chapter 11 and verse 9,
rejoice young man while you were young.
And let your heart be glad
in the days of your youth.
Well, many young people have found real joy
and peace by choosing a career
in the full-time service.
But now, when we say full-time service,
what are we talking about?
Well, full-time service is not just one thing.
It actually includes many things.
It includes pioneering maybe in your home congregation
or maybe in another area,
maybe in another city, state, province,
even in another country.
It might mean assisting with
theocratic construction projects,
maybe building kingdom halls or assembly halls
or building remote translation offices
or even working at Bethel facilities.
And it also could mean submitting an application
for Bethel service and becoming a Bethelite.
Really, there are so many wonderful opportunities
that are available for you young ones
in full-time service.
But now, here's a question.
What challenges could prevent you
from starting or continuing
on the path of full-time service?
And more importantly,
how can you overcome those challenges?
Well, let's talk about three obstacles.
Here's the first one.
It's financial concerns.
How am I going to support myself?
Well, let's look at something that Jesus said.
In Matthew, chapter 6,
and verse 33,
Matthew 6, verse 33, Jesus said,
keep on then seeking first the kingdom
and his righteousness,
and all these other things
will be added to you.
Well, now, okay.
It says all these other things,
what other things?
What is Jesus talking about here?
Well, to find out,
when do we go back up to verse 25?
And let's read a little bit more
of what Jesus was talking about
when he said those famous words.
Verse 25,
on this account,
I say to you,
stop being anxious about your lives
as to what you will eat
or what you will drink
or about your bodies
as to what you will wear.
Does not life mean more than food
and the body than clothing?
Now, after identifying,
now we know what Jesus is talking about.
He's talking about our necessities,
food, shelter, clothing.
But now, look at the illustrations
Jesus goes on to give now,
beginning here in verse 26.
Observe intently
the birds of heaven.
They do not so seed
or reap
or gather into storehouses
yet your heavenly Father feeds them.
Are you not worth more than they are?
Who of you by being anxious
can add one qubit to his life's man?
Also, why are you anxious about clothing?
Take a lesson from the lilies of the field,
how they grow,
they do not toil,
nor do they spin.
But I tell you that not even Solomon
in all his glory
was arrayed as one of these.
Now, if this is how God clothes
the vegetation of the field
that's here today
and tomorrow is thrown into the oven,
will he not much rather clothes
you, you with little faith?
So, never be anxious
and say, what are we to eat
or what are we to drink
or what are we to wear?
For all these are the things
the nations are eagerly pursuing.
Your heavenly Father knows
that you need all these things.
Well, do you get the sense of this?
Jesus was trying to reason
that just as Jehovah provides
for all of his creation,
he can provide for you too.
We just need to develop our faith
that Jehovah will provide
the things we need
if we put his service first.
Well, does that mean
that Jehovah is just going to drop
into our lap
everything that we need?
Well, no.
Jehovah expects that we're going to use
the things that he's given us
to be able to support ourselves.
So, it's very wise,
when you're young,
to plan ahead
so that you can obtain the skills
you need to be able to support yourself.
Now, in some lands,
it may be that as you're growing up,
you can learn a trade
from your Father
or from your mother
or maybe even from another relative.
In other lands, you might be able
while you're still in high school
to take some vocational courses
that would help you to learn a skill
or learn a trade.
But here's the point.
We need to plan.
So, ask yourself,
what abilities and skills do I have
that I could use to support myself?
A sister named Kelly
had a very clear goal in mind
of becoming a pioneer.
So, what did she do?
Well, this is what she says.
I had to choose something
that would allow me to support myself
in my ministry.
Kelly enrolled in a vocational program
in her high school.
And that helped her to achieve
her primary goal.
Here's what she said.
The full-time ministry
was what I wanted to do.
Everything else was secondary.
Well, how does Kelly feel now
about the decision that she made?
She says, I feel my decision
was the best one that I could have made.
You, young brothers and sisters,
you can overcome that challenge
just by planning ahead
and making sure that you have practical skills
you can use to support yourself.
Here's the second obstacle.
Pressure from others.
My relatives want me to focus on making money.
Well, if that's the case,
explain your spiritual goals
in a calm, respectful way.
Colossians chapter four in verse six says,
let your words always be gracious,
seasoned with salt.
Well, we all know
when we eat food with no salt
doesn't taste very good, does it?
You put a little salt on it,
now it becomes delicious.
So, make sure that when you speak
to your relatives,
you put a little salt on those words
so that you can reason with them
and help them to see the wisdom
of the decision that you want to make.
Well, it could be your relatives
will not agree with you.
But let's look at something that Jesus said here at Luke,
chapter seven,
and verse 35,
Jesus said all the same.
Wisdom is proved righteous,
or now if you look at the footnote,
it says, or is vindicated
by all its children.
Well, now what's the point?
Well, sometimes when people make a decision,
we're not sure if it was the right one or not.
But when the decision works out well,
when it leads to success,
when people see how happy you are
and how successful you are,
the joy, the satisfaction you have,
well, then what happens?
Well, maybe your relatives will see
that your decision has been vindicated.
It's been proved righteous
by the way things have turned out.
Here's obstacle number three.
Unexpected challenges.
I thought it was going to be easier than this.
Well, those unexpected challenges can be many.
It could be just trying to get used to new roommates,
dealing with personality challenges,
or even just coping with homesickness.
Here's the point.
Don't give up.
Notice what James said here in James chapter one,
James chapter one,
and verse four.
Now, you notice, as you look at verse two,
James is talking about trials,
and he's talking about how trials
can have a positive effect on us,
but now look what he says in verse four.
But let endurance complete its work
so that you may be complete and sound
in all respects, not lacking in anything.
What's James trying to say?
What's his point?
Well, have you ever heard the expression,
no pain, no gain?
Well, if you want to reach a certain fitness goal,
or if you want to be very good at playing a certain sport,
no doubt you're going to have some aching muscles,
and no doubt you're going to have some hurt pride along the way too.
Maybe you won't be very good when you first start,
but what do you do?
If you want to become good,
if you want to reach your goal, you can't give up.
You have to keep trying.
Well, the same could be said
about reaching our spiritual goals.
You see, James mentions that trials often reveal our weaknesses.
Maybe it's some aspect of our personality that needs improvement,
or maybe it's something in our relationship with Jehovah.
Maybe we need greater faith.
Maybe we need greater trust.
If we endure even during periods of trial
and we refuse to give up, we become stronger.
We become stronger in our spirituality
and our relationship with Jehovah,
our love for him, our faith in him,
our trust in him just continues to grow.
As James says, there in verse four,
we become complete or sound in all respects,
not lacking in anything.
So, when those trials come,
and they will come,
don't look for a quick way out.
And doer, keep going, don't give up.
Seek advice from brothers and sisters
who have successfully coped with similar challenges.
And you too will be successful.
In the following video,
notice how some full-time servants have found real peace
despite those three obstacles,
financial concerns,
pressure from others,
and unexpected challenges.
I pray to Jehovah,
if it is your will,
I would be happy to enter Pioneer Service.
But I had to work really hard to provide for the needs of my family
because my father had died when he was 45 years old.
The elder I talked to gave me advice not to be picky
on what kind of job I would have.
He reminded me of Matthew 633
and told me not to be overly anxious.
Because of our good communication within the family,
we were able to find solutions.
My other siblings realized that they also shared responsibility
in providing for the needs of the family.
After one year of pioneering,
I was encouraged to apply for Bethel Service.
And now I am in Bethel.
I feel that Jehovah really cares for me,
loves me,
and appreciates all my efforts.
Because they love me,
my cousins pressured me to choose a secular career.
If I went against their wishes,
it would hurt them,
and put a strain on our relationship.
I was really anxious.
I wanted to show my trust in Jehovah by pioneering
and give him an opportunity to show me
that I can be happy in his service.
I tried to express my appreciation for my cousins
by what I said and did,
and showed them love.
They realized that I have changed for the better.
I show more concern for others now.
Now they understand that we have been learning good things,
and that we have a happier and more meaningful life.
I wanted to try serving where the need was great.
When I first arrived, I thought it was so cool being there.
I had expected the poverty,
but when I saw it hit home more than what I had expected.
So then I started to feel really homesick.
But my brothers and sisters, I'd go to the Kingdom Hall,
and they were able to cope with the challenges
that they were facing because they had Jehovah in their life.
So that, their example really helped me to see
that my circumstances don't need to change
from my attitude to change.
Proverbs 15, 15, stood out to me
with having a cheerful heart
and being able to have a continual feast
no matter what my circumstances are.
And I found an article about that scripture.
And so from there I decided to ask myself,
how can I use my situation
and what I'm learning to help others
and got to start helping with foreign language group there?
That whole experience just made my love for people grow so much
and definitely changed my life.
Some of your non-witness family members
might offer you secular or financial advice.
We know they mean well
and they feel that they're giving you the best advice
because they love you.
But young brothers and sisters,
we are convinced that the blessings of full-time service
far outweigh any challenges that might go along with it.
Just think of the experiences that we heard in the video.
Harley's choices allowed him to go to Bethel
and helped him to feel that Jehovah really loved him.
Angel's choices took courage
but those choices helped him to be more concerned about other people
and helped his relatives to see
that he had made a good decision.
And Carly did not give up when the trials came.
Instead, she learned to love other people even more
and became a more powerful strong Christian.
Brothers and sisters, why are we so convinced
that full-time service will lead you young ones to a wonderful life?
Well, it's because that's the decision
that so many of us made when we were young.
Do you remember that 18-year-old young brother
who was trying to decide which path to take?
Well, that was me some years ago.
I'm so glad that with the help of Jehovah
and my parents and other mature friends in the congregation,
I made the decision just like so many other brothers
and sisters around the world to turn down that scholarship
to give up university and go directly into the full-time service.
That is a decision that I have never regretted.
That is a decision that I will never regret.
Young people, Jehovah loves you.
He wants you to have a wonderful, awesome life.
Choose the path of full-time service if you can.
You will never regret it.
It will put you on a path that leads to joy
and peace with our marvelous, wonderful God, Jehovah.
Thank you, brother Sanderson,
for the warm encouragement to pursue full-time service
from an early age.
Now we invite all to join in singing song number 135,
Jehovah's Warm Appeal.
Be wise, my son.
That song number 135.